docs: add migration explanation (#1152)
canonical/craft-parts: docs/common/craft-parts/explanation/migration.rst

Author: Renamed as requested.

.. _lifecycle:

**************
File migration

> **************

Author: Not covered here: file collision, overlay-to-partition migration details, partitioning details. These can be documented separately.

During the lifecycle execution, files resulting from building a part
are transferred from that part's install directory to a shared stage
directory, and from there to the prime directory. The process of moving
content between steps during the lifecycle is referred to as "migration".
Not all files from a step are necessarily migrated — users can apply
filters to exclude certain files, or specify which ones should proceed
to the next step.

The lifecycle also supports granular operations such as executing individual
steps, removing files tied to a specific part, or running a step for a
specific part. To allow that, the system maintains metadata to track file
ownership in shared areas, mapping each file to its originating part.

> Migration state

Reviewer: aybe the distinction you made at the end with "migration states" and "lifecycle states" is enough? I suspect "migration maps" might be a bit too specific, or be confusing if the implementation is not really a map.

> Migration state

Author: Using "migration tracking state", as discussed with @upils.

---------------

The list of files belonging to a part is necessary when files are migrated
from a shared directory, or when files from a specific part must be removed
from an area containing files from different parts. This mapping is obtained
when migrating files from part-specific directories, and is called the
"migration state".

Simple file migration
---------------------

> During the execution of a simple four-step lifecycle, files from the part's

Author: Will rephrase.

> install directory are migrated to the stage area and from there to prime.

Author: Changed as suggested.

specific part happens across all partitions. In this example, if files from
part 1 are to be removed from prime, files ``A`` and ``B`` will be deleted.
For that, separate migration states are obtained from all parts in all
partitions.

File migration using overlays
-----------------------------

When the overlay feature is enabled, files can originate from both the part's
install directory and the overlay area. In the diagram, files from the overlay
are represented as squares, and files from the build install are represented
as circles.

.. image:: /common/craft-parts/images/overlay_migration.png

If overlays are used, it's important to note that the files originating from
the overlay form a set that are moved or deleted as a group. In the example
above, if files from part 1 are to be deleted from prime, only files ``A``
and ``B`` are removed. Overlay files are only removed when files from all parts
containing overlay files are removed. Conversely, when files are migrated, the
entire set of overlay files is migrated along with the first part that contains
overlay files. A part with no overlay files will have all its files processed

> immediately.

Author: Note added.

> immediately.

Author: Maybe this is implicit and unecessary. I removed the note.

> File migration using partitions and overlays

Author: This is the general case we'll need to cover in the lifecycle refactoring. All other scenarios should be particular cases where a type of migration won't happen.

--------------------------------------------

> When both partitions and overlays are enabled, files from overlay can be moved

Author: This is correct in the sense that you only need to feature to be enabled even if you don't use them.

to other partitions using mount maps. This operation also generates a migration
state to keep track of the files originating part.

.. image:: /common/craft-parts/images/partition_overlay_migration.png

> The same constraints for overlay file removal and migration apply, extended to

Reviewer: Yes :D, but I found more natural to mention the migration before the removal, since it will happen in this order.

.. _migration:

**************
File migration
**************

During the lifecycle execution, files resulting from building a part
are transferred from that part's install directory to a shared stage
directory, and from there to the prime directory. The process of moving
content between steps during the lifecycle is referred to as "migration".
Not all files from a step are necessarily migrated — users can apply
filters to exclude certain files, or specify which ones should proceed
to the next step.

The lifecycle also supports granular operations such as executing individual
steps, removing files tied to a specific part, or running a step for a
specific part. To allow that, the system maintains metadata to track file
ownership in shared areas, mapping each file to its originating part.

Migration tracking
------------------

> The list of files belonging to a part is necessary when files are migrated

Author: The word "list" here is not referring to the Python type, but to the actual collection of filesystem entries attached to that part. I rephrased the entire paragraph to be more specific about what is happening at this moment.

from a shared directory, or when files from a specific part must be removed
from a directory containing files from different parts. This mapping is
obtained when migrating files from part-specific directories, and is called
the "migration tracking state".

Simple file migration
---------------------

> During the execution of a the lifcycle, files from the part's install directory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the execution of the lifecycle, files from the part's install directory
```

are migrated to the stage area and from there to prime. In the following diagram,
files are represented as circles with letters. The green circles correspond to
files from part 1, while blue circles represent files from part 2.

.. image:: /common/craft-parts/images/simple_migration.svg

Files ``A`` and ``B`` originate from part 1, while files ``C`` and ``D``
originate from part 2. They are staged into a common area, and then migrated
to the prime directory. Note that file ``D`` is filtered out when priming, and
is not part of the final primed contents. The migration tracking state for parts
1 and 2 is obtained from the contents of each of the parts' install directories
while they're still separate (marked with red ellipses in the diagram).

When files from a specific part need to be migrated from stage to prime or
removed from stage or prime, the migration tracking state contains the list

> of files to migrate or remove.

Reviewer 2: Will handle in a followup PR.

File migration using partitions

> -------------------------------

Author: Changed as requested.

When the partitions feature is enabled, files can be organized from a part's
install directory to a different partition. In this case, files are migrated

> to the partition's specific stage and prime directories.

Author: Changed as requested.

.. image:: /common/craft-parts/images/partition_migration.svg

When partitions are used, an operation to remove or migrate files from a
specific part happens across all partitions. In this example, if files from

> part 1 are to be removed from prime, files ``A`` and ``B`` will be deleted.

Author: Changed as requested.

For that, separate migration tracking states are obtained from all parts in
all partitions.

File migration using overlays

> -----------------------------

Author: Changed as requested.

When the overlay feature is enabled, files can originate from both the part's
install directory and the overlay area. In the diagram, files from the overlay
are represented as squares, and files from the build install are represented

> as circles.

Reviewer 2: @cmatsuoka will handle in a followup PR.

> .. image:: /common/craft-parts/images/overlay_migration.svg

Reviewer 2: @cmatsuoka will handle in a followup PR.

If overlays are used, it's important to note that the files originating from
the overlay form a set that are moved or deleted as a group. In the example
above, if files from part 1 are to be deleted from prime, only files ``A``
and ``B`` are removed. Overlay files are only removed when files from all parts
containing overlay files are removed. Conversely, when files are migrated, the
entire set of overlay files is migrated along with the first part that contains

> overlay files.

Reviewer 2: @cmatsuoka will handle in a followup PR.

> Note that if a part depends on another part, cleaning the latter will also

Author: Changed as requested.

cause the former to be cleaned.

> File migration using partitions and overlays

Author: Changed as requested.

--------------------------------------------

When both the partition and overlays features are enabled, files from overlay can
be moved to other partitions using mount maps. This operation also generates a

> migration state to keep track of the files originating part.

Author: Changed as requested.

.. image:: /common/craft-parts/images/partition_overlay_migration.svg

The same constraints for overlay file removal and migration apply, extended to
all partitions. In the example above, if files from part 1 are to be removed from
stage, files ``A`` and ``B`` are removed, but file ``E`` is only removed when
part 2 files are also removed (because overlay files can only be removed at the 
same time).

Migration tracking information in the case with partitions and overlays is
obtained from the part's install directories across partitions, overlay migration,

> and overlay mounts.

Author: Changed as suggested.
